=head1 NAME

pam_krb5 - Kerberos v5 PAM module

=head1 SYNOPSIS

  auth            sufficient      pam_krb5.so ignore_root
  session         optional        pam_krb5.so ignore_root
  account         required        pam_krb5.so ignore_root
  password        optional        pam_krb5.so ignore_root

=head1 DESCRIPTION

The Kerberos v5 service module for PAM, typically installed at
F</lib/security/pam_krb5.so>, provides functionality for the four PAM
operations: authentication, account management, session management, and
password management.  F<pam_krb5.so> is a shared object that is
dynamically loaded by the PAM subsystem as necessary, based on the system
PAM configuration.  PAM is a system for plugging in external
authentication and session management modules so that each application
doesn't have to know the best way to check user authentication or create a
user session on that system.  For details on how to configure PAM on your
system, see the PAM man page, often pam(7).

Here are the actions of this module when called from each group:

=over 4

=item auth

Provides implementations of pam_authenticate() and pam_setcred().  The
former takes the username from the PAM session, prompts for the user's
password (unless configured to use an already-entered password), and then
performs a Kerberos initial authentication, storing the obtained
credentials (if successful) in a temporary ticket cache.  The latter,
depending on the flags it is called with, either takes the contents of the
temporary ticket cache and writes it out to a persistant ticket cache
owned by the user or uses the temporary ticket cache to refresh an
existing user ticket cache.

After doing the initial authentication, the Kerberos PAM module will
attempt to obtain tickets for a key in the local system keytab and then
verify those tickets.  Unless this step is performed, the authentication
is vulnerable to KDC spoofing, but it requires that the system have a
local key and that the PAM module be running as a user that can read the
keytab file (normally F</etc/krb5.keytab>.  You can point the Kerberos PAM
module at a different keytab with the I<keytab> option.  If that keytab
cannot be read or if no keys are found in it, the default (potentially
insecure) behavior is to skip this check.  If you want to instead fail
authentication if the obtained tickets cannot be checked, set
C<verify_ap_req_nofail> to true in the [libdefaults] section of
F</etc/krb5.conf>.  Note that this will affect applications other than
this PAM module.

By default, whenever the user is authenticated, a basic authorization
check will also be done using krb5_kuserok().  The default behavior of
this function is to check the user's account for a F<.k5login> file and,
if one is present, ensure that the user's principal is listed in that
file.  If F<.k5login> is not present, the default check is to ensure that
the user's principal is in the default local realm and the user portion of
the principal matches the account name (this can be changed by configuring
a custom aname to localname mapping in F<krb5.conf>; see the Kerberos
documentation for details).  This can be customized with several
configuration options; see below.

If the username provided to PAM contains an C<@> and Kerberos can,
treating the username as a principal, map it to a local account name,
pam_authenticate() will change the PAM user to that local account name.
This allows users to log in with their Kerberos principal and let Kerberos
do the mapping to an account.

When pam_setcred() is called to initialize a new ticket cache, the
environment variable KRB5CCNAME is set to the path to that ticket cache.
By default, the cache will be named F</tmp/krb5cc_UID_RANDOM> where UID is
the user's UID and RANDOM is six randomly-chosen letters.  This can be
configured with the I<ccache> and I<ccache_dir> options.

If pam_setcred() initializes a new ticket cache, it will also set up that
ticket cache so that it will be deleted when the PAM session is closed.
Normally, the calling program (B<login>, B<sshd>, etc.) will run the
user's shell as a sub-process, wait for it to exit, and then close the PAM
session, thereby cleaning up the user's session.

=item session

Provides implementations of pam_open_session(), which is equivalent to
calling pam_setcred() with the PAM_ESTABLISH_CRED flag, and
pam_close_session(), which destroys the ticket cache created by
pam_setcred().

=item account

Provides an implementation of pam_acct_mgmt().  All it does is do the same
authorization check as performed by the pam_authenticate() implementation
described above.

=item password

Provides an implementation of pam_chauthtok(), which implements password
changes.  The user is prompted for their existing password (unless
configured to use an already entered one) and the PAM module then obtains
credentials for the special Kerberos principal C<kadmin/changepw>.  It
then prompts the user for a new password, twice to ensure that the user
entered it properly (again, unless configured to use an already entered
password), and then does a Kerberos password change.

Unlike the normal Unix password module, this module will allow any user to
change any other user's password if they know the old password.  Also,
unlike the normal Unix password module, root will always be prompted for
the old password, since root has no special status in Kerberos.  (To
change passwords in Kerberos without knowing the old password, use
kadmin(8) instead.)

=back

Both the account and session management calls of the Kerberos v5 PAM
module will silently return success if called in the context of a PAM
session for a user who did not authenticate with Kerberos.

Note that this module assumes the network is available in order to do a
Kerberos authentication, and if the network is not available, some
Kerberos libraries have timeouts longer than the timeout imposed by the
login process.  This means that using this module incautiously can make it
impossible to log on to console as root.  For this reason, you should
always use the I<ignore_root> or I<minimum_uid> options, list a local
authentication module such as B<pam_unix> first with a control field of
C<sufficient> so that the Kerberos PAM module will be skipped if local
password authentication was successful.

This is not the same PAM module as the Kerberos PAM module available from
Sourceforge.  It supports many of the same options, has some additional
options, and doesn't support some of the options the Sourceforge module
does.

=head1 CONFIGURATION

The Kerberos v5 PAM module takes many options, not all of which are
relevant to every PAM group; options that are not relevant will be
silently ignored.  Any of these options can be set in the PAM
configuration as arguments listed after C<pam_krb5.so>.  Some of the
options can also be set in the system F<krb5.conf> file; if this is
possible, it will be noted below in the option description.

To set a boolean option in the PAM configuration file, just give the name
of the option in the arguments.  To set an option that takes an argument,
follow the option name with an equal sign (=) and the value, with no
separating whitespace.  Whitespace in option arguments is not supported in
the PAM configuration.

To set an option for the PAM module in the system F<krb5.conf> file, put
that option in the [appdefaults] section.  The Kerberos v5 PAM module will
look for options either at the top level of the [appdefaults] section or
in a subsection named C<pam>, inside or outside a section for the realm.
For example, the following fragment of a F<krb5.conf> file would set
I<forwardable> to true, I<minimum_uid> to 100, and set I<ignore_k5login>
only if the realm is EXAMPLE.COM.

    [appdefaults]
        forwardable = true
        pam = {
            minimum_uid = 100
            EXAMPLE.COM = {
                ignore_k5login = true
            }
        }

For more information on the syntax of F<krb5.conf>, see krb5.conf(5).
Note that options that depend on the realm will be set only on the basis
of the default realm, either as configured in krb5.conf(5) or as set by
the I<realm> option described below.  If the user authenticates to an
account qualified with a realm, that realm will not be used when
determining which options will apply.

There is no difference to the PAM module whether options are specified at
the top level or in a C<pam> section; the C<pam> section is supported in
case there are options that should be set for the PAM module but not for
other applications.

If the same option is set in F<krb5.conf> and in the PAM configuration,
the latter takes precedent.  Note, however, that due to the configuration
syntax, there's no way to turn off a boolean option in the PAM
configuration that was turned on in F<krb5.conf>.

=over 4

=item banner=<banner>

By default, the prompts when a user changes their password are:

    Current Kerberos password:
    Enter new Kerberos password:
    Retype new Kerberos password:

The string "Kerberos" is inserted so that users aren't confused about
which password they're changing.  Setting this option replaces the word
"Kerberos" with whatever this option is set to.  Setting this option to
the empty string removes the word before "password:" entirely.

If set in the PAM configuration, <banner> may not contain whitespace.  If
you want a value containing whitespace, set it in F<krb5.conf>.

This option can be set in F<krb5.conf> and is only applicable to the
password group.

=item ccache=<pattern>

Use <pattern> as the pattern for creating credential cache names.
<pattern> must be in the form <type>:<residual> where <type> and the
following colon are optional if a file cache should be used.  The special
token C<%u>, anywhere in <pattern>, is replaced with the user's numeric
UID.  The special token C<%p>, anywhere in <pattern>, is replaced with the
current process ID.

If <pattern> ends in the literal string C<XXXXXX> (six X's), that string
will be replaced by randomly generated characters and the ticket cache
will be created using mkstemp(3).  This is strongly recommended if
<pattern> points to a world-writable directory.

This option can be set in F<krb5.conf> and is only applicable to the auth
and session groups.

=item ccache_dir=<directory>

Store user ticket caches in <directory> instead of in F</tmp>.  The
algorithm for generating the ticket cache name is otherwise unchanged.
<directory> may be prefixed with C<FILE:> to make the cache type
unambiguous (and this may be required on systems that use a cache type
other than file as the default).

This option can be set in F<krb5.conf> and is only applicable to the auth
and session groups.

=item debug

Log more verbose trace and debugging information to syslog at LOG_DEBUG
priority, including entry and exit from each of the external PAM
interfaces (except pam_close_session).

This option can be set in F<krb5.conf>.

=item expose_account

By default, the Kerberos PAM module password prompt is simply
"Password:".  This avoids leaking any information about the system realm
or account to principal conversions.  If this option is set, the string
"for <principal>" is added before the colon, where <principal> is the
user's principal.  This string is also added before the colon on prompts
when changing the user's password.

Enabling this option with ChallengeResponseAuthentication enabled in
OpenSSH may cause problems for some ssh clients that only recognize
"Password:" as a prompt.  This option is automatically disabled if
I<search_k5login> is enabled since the principal displayed would be
inaccurate.

This option can be set in F<krb5.conf> and is only applicable to the auth
and password groups.

=item forwardable

Obtain forwardable tickets.  If set (to either true or false, although it
can only be set to false in F<krb5.conf>), this overrides the Kerberos
library default set in the [libdefaults] section of F<krb5.conf>.

This option can be set in F<krb5.conf> and is only applicable to the auth
group.

=item ignore_k5login

Never look for a F<.k5login> file in the user's home directory.  Instead,
only check that the Kerberos principal maps to the local account name.
The default check is to ensure the realm matches the local realm and the
user portion of the principal matches the local account name, but this can
be customized by setting up an aname to localname mapping in F<krb5.conf>.

This option can be set in F<krb5.conf> and is only applicable to the auth
and account groups.

=item ignore_root

Do not do anything if the username is C<root>.  The authentication and
password calls will silently fail (allowing that status to be ignored via
a control of C<optional> or C<sufficient>), and the account and session
calls (including pam_setcred) will silently succeed.  This option is
supported and will remain, but normally you want to use I<minimum_uid>
instead.

This option can be set in F<krb5.conf>.

=item keytab=<path>

Specifies the keytab to use when validating the user's credentials.  The
default is the default system keytab (normally F</etc/krb5.keytab>), which
is usually only readable by root.  Applications not running as root that
use this PAM module for authentication may wish to point it to another
keytab the application can read.

This option can be set in F<krb5.conf> and is only applicable to the auth
group.

=item minimum_uid=<uid>

Do not do anything if the authenticated account name corresponds to a
local account and that local account has a UID lower than <uid>.  If both
of those conditions are true, the authentication and password calls will
silently fail (allowing that status to be ignored via a control of
C<optional> or C<sufficient>), and the account and session calls
(including pam_setcred) will silently succeed.  Using this option is
highly recommended if you don't need to use Kerberos to authenticate
password logins to the root account (which isn't recommended since
Kerberos requires a network connection).

This option can be set in F<krb5.conf>.

=item no_ccache

Do not create a ticket cache after authentication.  This option shouldn't
be set in general, but is useful as part of the PAM configuration for a
particular service that uses PAM for authentication but isn't creating
user sessions and doesn't want the overhead of ever writing the user
credentials to disk.  When using this option, the application should only
call pam_authenticate(); other functions like pam_setcred() and
pam_start_session() don't make sense with this option.

This option is only applicable to the auth group.

=item pkinit_anchors=<anchors>

When doing PKINIT authentication, use <anchors> as the client trust
anchors.  This is normally a reference to a file containing the trusted
certificate authorities.  This option is only used if I<try_pkinit> or
I<use_pkinit> are set.

This option can be set in F<krb5.conf> and is only applicable to the auth
and password groups.

=item pkinit_prompt

Before attempting PKINIT authentication, prompt the user to insert a smart
card.  You may want to set this option for programs such as
B<gnome-screensaver> that call PAM as soon as the mouse is touched and
don't give the user an opportunity to enter the smart card first.  Any
information entered at the first prompt is ignored.  If I<try_pkinit> is
set, a user who wishes to use a password instead can just press Enter and
then enter their password as normal.  This option is only used if
I<try_pkinit> or I<use_pkinit> are set.

This option can be set in F<krb5.conf> and is only applicable to the auth
and password groups.

=item pkinit_user=<userid>

When doing PKINIT authentication, use <userid> as the user ID.  The value
of this string is highly dependent on the type of PKINIT implementation
you're using, but will generally be something like:

    PKCS11:/usr/lib/pkcs11/lib/soft-pkcs11.so

to specify the module to use with a smart card.  It may also point to a
user certificate or to other types of user IDs.  See the Kerberos library
documentation for more details.  This option is only used if I<try_pkinit>
or I<use_pkinit> are set.

This option can be set in F<krb5.conf> and is only applicable to the auth
and password groups.

=item preauth_opt=<option>

Sets a preauth option (currently only applicable when built with MIT
Kerberos).  <option> is either a key/value pair with the key separated
from the value by C<=> or a boolean option (in which case it's turned
on).  In F<krb5.conf>, multiple options should be separated by
whitespace.  In the PAM configuration, this option can be given multiple
times to set multiple options.  In either case, <option> may not contain
whitespace.

The primary use of this option, at least in the near future, will be to
set options for the MIT Kerberos PKINIT support.  For the full list of
possible options, see the PKINIT plugin documentation.  At the time of
this writing, C<X509_user_identity> is equivalent to I<pkinit_user> and
C<X509_anchors> is equivalent to I<pkinit_anchors>.  C<flag_DSA_PROTOCOL>
can only be set via this option.

Any settings made with this option are applied after the I<pkinit_anchors>
and I<pkinit_user> options, so if an equivalent setting is made via
I<preauth_opt>, it will probably override the other setting.

This option can be set in F<krb5.conf> and is only applicable to the auth
and password groups.  Note that there is no way to remove a setting made
in F<krb5.conf> using the PAM configuration, but options set in the PAM
configuration are applied after options set in F<krb5.conf> and therefore
may override earlier settings.

=item realm=<realm>

Obtain credentials in the specified realm rather than in the default realm
for this system.  If this option is used, it should be set for all groups
being used for consistent results (although the account group currently
doesn't care about realm).  This will not change authorization decisions.
If the obtained credentials are supposed to allow access to a shell
account, the user will need an appropriate F<.k5login> file entry or the
system will have to have a custom aname_to_localname mapping.

=item renew_lifetime=<lifetime>

Obtain renewable tickets with a maximum renewable lifetime of <lifetime>.
<lifetime> should be a Kerberos lifetime string such as C<2d4h10m> or a
time in minutes.  If set, this overrides the Kerberos library default set
in the [libdefaults] section of F<krb5.conf>.

This option can be set in F<krb5.conf> and is only applicable to the auth
group.

=item retain_after_close

Normally, the user's ticket cache is destroyed when either pam_end() or
pam_close_session() is called by the authenticating application so that
ticket caches aren't left behind after the user logs out.  In some cases,
however, this isn't desireable.  (On Solaris 8, for instance, the default
behavior means login will destroy the ticket cache before running the
user's shell.)  If this option is set, the PAM module will never destroy
the user's ticket cache.  If you set this, you may want to call
B<kdestroy> in the shell's logout configuration or run a temporary file
removal program to avoid accumulating hundreds of ticket caches in
F</tmp>.

This option can be set in F<krb5.conf> and is only applicable to the auth
and session groups.

=item search_k5login

Normally, the Kerberos implementation of pam_authenticate attempts to
obtain tickets for the authenticating username in the local realm.  If
this option is set and the local user has a F<.k5login> file in their home
directory, the module will instead open and read that F<.k5login> file,
attempting to use the supplied password to authenticate as each principal
listed there in turn.  If any of those authentications succeed, the user
will be successfully authenticated; otherwise, authentication will fail.
This option is useful for allowing password authentication (via console or
sshd without GSS-API support) to shared accounts.  If there is no
F<.k5login> file, the behavior is the same as normal.  Using this option
requires that the user's F<.k5login> file be readable at the time of
authentication.

This option can be set in F<krb5.conf> and is only applicable to the auth
group.

=item ticket_lifetime=<lifetime>

Obtain tickets with a maximum lifetime of <lifetime>.  <lifetime> should
be a Kerberos lifetime string such as C<2d4h10m> or a time in minutes.  If
set, this overrides the Kerberos library default set in the [libdefaults]
section of F<krb5.conf>.

This option can be set in F<krb5.conf> and is only applicable to the auth
group.

=item try_first_pass

If the authentication module isn't the first on the stack, and a previous
module obtained the user's password, use that password to authenticate the
user without prompting them again.  If that authentication fails, fall
back on prompting the user for their password.  This option has no effect
if the authentication module is first in the stack or if no previous
module obtained the user's password.

This option is only applicable to the auth and password groups.  For the
password group, it applies to both the old and new passwords.

=item try_pkinit

Attempt PKINIT authentication before trying a regular password.  You will
probably also need to set the I<pkinit_user> configuration option.  If
PKINIT fails, the PAM module will fall back on regular password
authentication.  This option is currently only supported if pam-krb5 was
built against Heimdal 0.8rc1 or later or the MIT Kerberos PKINIT branch.

This option can be set in F<krb5.conf> and is only applicable to the auth
and password groups.

=item use_authtok

Use the password obtained by a previous authentication module to
authenticate the user and any password obtained by a previous password
module for the new password when changing passwords.  If these passwords
aren't available, fail.  Never prompt the user for a password under any
circumstances.  This can be used to require passwords be checked by
another, prior module, such as B<pam_cracklib>.

This option is only applicable to the auth and password groups.

=item use_first_pass

Use the password obtained by a previous authentication module to
authenticate the user, and the password obtained by a previous password
module as the new password when changing passwords, without prompting the
user again again.  If no previous module obtained the user's password for
either an authentication or password change, fall back on prompting the
user.  If a previous module did obtain the user's password but
authentication with that password fails, fail without further prompting
the user.

This option is only applicable to the auth and password groups.

=item use_pkinit

Require PKINIT authentication.  You will probably also need to set the
I<pkinit_user> configuration option.  If PKINIT fails, authentication will
fail.  This option is currently only supported if pam-krb5 was built
against Heimdal 0.8rc1 or later.

This option can be set in F<krb5.conf> and is only applicable to the auth
and password groups.

=back

=head1 ENVIRONMENT

=over 4

=item KRB5CCNAME

Set by pam_setcred() with the PAM_ESTABLISH_CRED option, and therefore
also by pam_open_session(), to point to the new credential cache for the
user.  See the I<ccache> and I<ccache_dir> options.  By default, the cache
name will be prefixed with C<FILE:> to make the cache type unambiguous.

=item PAM_KRB5CCNAME

Set by pam_authenticate() to point to the temporary ticket cache used for
authentication (unless the I<no_ccache> option was given).  pam_setcred()
then uses that environment variable to locate the temporary cache even if
it was not called in the same PAM session as pam_authenticate() (a problem
with B<sshd> running in some modes).  This environment variable is only
used internal to the PAM module.

=back

=head1 FILES

=over 4

=item F</tmp/krb5cc_UID_RANDOM>

The default credential cache name.  UID is the decimal UID of the local
user and RANDOM is a random six-character string.  The pattern may be
changed with the I<ccache> option and the directory with the I<ccache_dir>
option.

=item F</tmp/krb5cc_pam_RANDOM>

The credential cache name used for the temporary credential cache created
by pam_authenticate().  This cache is removed again when the PAM session
is ended or when pam_setcred() is called and will normally not be
user-visible.  RANDOM is a random six-character string.

=item F<~/.k5login>

File containing Kerberos principals that are allowed access to that
account.

=back

=head1 CAVEATS

The Kerberos library, via pam-krb5, will prompt the user to change their
password if their password is expired, but when using OpenSSH, this will
only work when ChallengeResponseAuthentication is enabled.  Unless this
option is enabled, OpenSSH doesn't pass PAM messages to the user and can
only respond to a simple password prompt.

If you are using MIT Kerberos, be aware that users whose passwords are
expired will not be prompted to change their password unless the KDC
configuration for your realm in [realms] in krb5.conf contains a
master_kdc setting or, if using DNS SRV records, you have a DNS entry for
_kerberos-master as well as _kerberos.

Old versions of OpenSSH are known to call pam_authenticate followed by
pam_setcred(PAM_REINITIALIZE_CRED) without first calling pam_open_session,
thereby requesting that an existing ticket cache be renewed (similar to
what a screensaver would want) rather than requesting a new ticket cache
be created.  Since this behavior is indistinguishable at the PAM level
from a screensaver, pam-krb5 when used with these old versions of OpenSSH
will refresh the ticket cache of the OpenSSH daemon rather than setting up
a new ticket cache for the user.  The resulting ticket cache will have the
correct permissions (this is not a security concern), but will not be
named correctly or referenced in the user's environment and will be
overwritten by the next user login.  The best solution to this problem is
to upgrade OpenSSH.  I'm not sure exactly when this problem was fixed, but
at the very least OpenSSH 4.3 and later do not exhibit it.

=head1 SEE ALSO

kadmin(8), kdestroy(1), krb5.conf(5), pam(7), passwd(1), syslog(3)

The current version of this module is available from its web page at
L<http://www.eyrie.org/~eagle/software/pam-krb5/>.

=cut
